The tapes are rolling.
Okay, the tapes are rolling.
So I will ask you the first question. If you could give us some background
where you grew up, how you got interested in what you do, and how you came to write science fiction.
Okay, I grew up in Chatham, New Jersey,
which is a suburb of New York, about 27, 28 miles west of New York.
And I always thought I was going to be an engineer.
My dad was an engineer, an electrochemical engineer.
But for some reason, once I got to college, and I came to college out here where I am now at ELSA,
Principia College, I got into chemistry as a major and decided that it was too specialized.
And then somehow or other switched to English and just went on in English.
I had done some reading of science fiction as a high school student,
but then I pretty much dropped it until about eight years ago.
And I was in bed for a while and just started reading science fiction for entertainment
and became fascinated with it all over again.
So that's how I got back into it.
What other kinds of writing do you do now professionally besides science fiction, fancy?
Well, I write a lot of reviews and quite a bit of poetry, some essays and some scholarly articles.
Pretty much run the gamut.
I teach a lot of writing and I try to do the kinds of writing that I professionally,
I ask my students to do so I can give them examples.
I had never published fiction before the breaking of North Wall Low.
I felt that quite a gap. I guess it's plugged now.
How does this kind of writing fit in with writing science fiction?
It's really very different because most of these other kinds of writing are much more exacting.
I think in some ways that is, in a sense, science fiction, although it should be good,
should also be easy and entertaining.
And so I think there's an atmosphere of fun that surrounds it both in the writing and the reading of it.
And for me, it's really entertainment. I can do it.
I'm tired late at night very often. I sit down to write and pretty soon I'm very wide awake.
I can't do that with an essay, certainly not with poems.
I think that writing poetry, as I've done now for well over 20 years, has helped me a great deal, though,
in gaining a feel of the sounds of words and the kind of sound clusters that evoke certain meanings.
And as you know, in poetry, every sound, every word is chiseled and worked on and worried about.
A great deal more than in entertaining fiction, but still I think the art of poetry feeds over into the other art.
I think those are the main differences that I see.
There is a subcategory of science fiction, which is science fiction poetry.
Have you ever attempted any of this or does that tempt you to try it?
Yeah, I have written some. I used to belong to the Science Fiction Poetry Association, but I let my membership lapse.
And for some reason or other, my imagination, my poetic imagination doesn't drift in the direction of science fiction.
Once in a while I'll do something.
I find that when I do write speculative or science fiction poetry, it tends to get very complicated and hard to understand.
And I'm not an obscurantist in poetry.
I believe that I give poetry readings, for example.
I don't believe in giving a reading that mystifies everybody.
I like a certain amount of immediacy, so it hasn't worked very well for me.
In the three novels, occasionally there were songs.
Were these original compositions, original poems?
Yes, yes, they're all original.
And some of them are, you know, really just quad-trained or in-stands.
There's nothing terribly remarkable.
I tried to, especially in the breaking of Northwell, use a variety of styles,
inventing new styles for each of the tribal groups, and that was kind of fun.
The most serious poem, I think, in all three volumes is one that is sung near the end of the Dome in the Forest.
And that's actually a poem I've had around for years, and I think I kind of like it.
It's sung by a character named Tristall.
A friend of mine told me the other day that she has just been divorced,
and I guess it was a friendly divorce or something,
and she copies the poem that's sent it to her ex-husband, which is kind of amusing to me.
It's on page 211 of the Dome in the Forest.
It starts, Good Bye, My Favorite Stranger.
I think that's the most serious poem in the three books.
I'm trying to remember, was this when he was recalling his dead friend who was buried up on the hill?
No, it's after that.
Tristall and Tor are logging for the winter, and Stell goes to visit them.
And Tristall sings in this song, and Stell is touched by it.
And later on, it's, oh, I'm sorry, it happens after they've been logging.
They come back to Stell Bargain, and they sing it for Stell, and he's touched by it.
And then, Arro, Stell's wife, is really very disturbed by it,
because she realizes that Tor and Tristall are leaving, and so she kind of crapped around a little bit.
And then they go to bed.
Early in the book, there's a song or poem which is recited by a strange character named Boute,
and he is under the influence of drugs.
He's interrupted in it.
I rather like that poem, too.
That is on page 51 of the Dome in the Forest.
Well, it must be nice, even though you have let your membership lapse in the poetry association,
that you can still write your poems and throw them in your books.
Yes, I must admit it's a form of self-indulgence.
Okay, you mentioned that the breaking of Northwell was your first published science fiction effort.
So I'd like to talk a little bit about the mechanics of that.
How long did it take you to, oh, how did the idea evolve?
How long did it take you to think the idea of work it out and then start getting it on paper?
Well, it was a very strange experience.
It was one of the strangest experiences I've ever had.
I always carry a notebook with me because I do write a lot and I like to have something ready if I get an idea.
And if I'm ever waiting for something, I use the notebook to amuse myself.
I was waiting for a meeting to start in the beginning of July.
And this strange image came into my mind.
And so I just started writing it down.
And when the meeting did start, I really didn't hear any of the meeting because the idea was generating.
And after the meeting, I went to my office and crammed a piece of paper in the typewriter
and started typing and I typed the first three pages of what's now in print.
And where the ideas came from, I had no idea.
And the rest of the summer, I worked on it every day.
I guess I must have been three or four days into it before I really realized I was writing a novel.
And by September 5th, I had a first draft, which was substantially what the novel became.
I did revise it, but not heavily.
And I just don't know how it happened.
I mean, it just sort of came and I didn't plot it.
I've plotted the other two, but I just sort of let it happen
and would go back to the typewriter every day to find out what was going to happen next.
And I never got stuck.
I always seemed to know what was going to happen.
One day, I went to church and I was trying to work out a battle scene, a climactic battle with the taunt all.
And I guess you're not supposed to go to church for this reason, but I didn't hear anything in church
because it all started coming clear.
And after church, I had lunch and started writing with one short break.
I wrote till midnight and I had finished the battle scene and written 35 pages,
which is by far the most I've ever written in one day.
But really, I was sort of amazed at the experience all along
because it seemed to be happening to me rather than something I was consciously doing.
And the other novel took a lot more effort, but this one would just sort of handed to me in a way.
You're mentioning of the battle scenes brings to mind a question,
especially at the climax of the breaking of North Wall.
The battles were really drawn out and the strategy was plotted.
The other two books, it was mainly skirmishes and one-on-one combat.
But do you have any experience with either planning battles or from historical perspectives?
Or you're interested in this one because they were very realistic.
No, I have absolutely none. I've never been in an army.
I've read very little about that sort of thing.
I don't know where that comes from.
I've often wondered myself how I keep gravitating towards battle scenes
when I don't think of myself as very belligerent.
But I think the reasoning out of how it ought to be done
and what would happen sort of fascinates me.
And sometimes they're useful as metaphors for various kinds of human conflict.
You discussed in quite a bit of detail the geography of the three rivers area
where certainly the first one took place and parts of the others.
Why did you locate the three main cities there? Where did that idea come from?
Well, I've lived here two miles downriver from where I put Pell Bargain down for 18 years.
And I'm utterly fascinated with this area of the United States.
I think I became that way when I was way back in high school I read Bernard de Voto's book,
The Course of Empire, which is mostly about the Louisiana Purchase
and the move westward, especially Lewis and Clark, in their expedition.
And the place has always had a sense of drama to me around here.
And also this particular area has a fantastic archaeological history.
It's the one area in all of North America that has the most, the densest, Indian or prehistoric population.
And I've done a good deal of study of archaeology too.
It just seemed like a natural place to put a rather settled civilization or culture rather
and have these others impinge upon it.
So I guess it really emerges from my own experience here.
And I teach American literature, so I'm very aware of the American continent.
I think it's a very dramatic place.
So much has happened here and over so rapidly.
It's a dramatic place to be.
So I guess that's the reason, really, I come at science fiction from a different angle from most people,
out of much more of a literary background than most science fiction writers,
and particularly out of American lit.
So I think my books tend to reach the two types a little more than most books do.
Probably the thing to me that made the novels most interesting was the descriptions of the various tribes and their little idiosyncrasies and the names.
Where did you come up with all this?
Well, I envisioned the Pell Bar as a group that had been started by a woman named Amanda Pell,
who had been a feminist.
And she is a metallurgist, or was, from a caterpillar tractor up in Peoria.
But she survived the Holocaust by the fact that she was spelunking down in the Ozarks.
And it would be quite natural for her to set up a feminist society.
And I really, I sort of tried to create the Pell Bar as a settled society with what you might call a nesting instinct.
And a natural combination of self-protectiveness and non-aggressiveness,
although they're certainly capable of great destructiveness.
But potentially a settled place like that becomes a kind of mother of civilization.
So that was what was in my mind there.
I created the Shumai in Santani out of my memories of, well, in part, out of my memories of the conflict of Caesar and the Celts in Britain.
The Shumai are very Celtic in their behavior because they're enthusiastic, artistic, kind of reckless and unorganized.
Whereas the Santani are much more Roman.
They organize into their star band and do everything in a pattern organized way.
And I invented some backgrounds for these groups.
The Shumai as offspring of the children of one farmer in southwestern Minnesota named Aaron Schumacher.
And the Santani, the explorer scout troop led by Antonio Santani, who was a watchmaker in Memphis, who happened to have a love of Roman history.
They were on a field trip to a coal mine in Tennessee, and so escaped the Holocaust there and created their society along quite different lines.
The weapons in the breaking of North wall really come out of local archeology because during most of post-glacial Indian history in this area,
the Indians were users of spears only fairly recently, well, 2000 years ago, they began to develop bows and arrows.
And that coincides with their becoming a more settled culture, adapting to agriculture and that kind of thing.
And I guess that culture shift was also in the back of my mind, although the strange thing about it was I figured all of this stuff out after I wrote the book.
You know, that's where it must have come from rather than consciously adopting these things for the book.
It might sound strange, but anyway, that's how it happened.
I want to hit some more on that in a minute.
Okay, you've explained kind of the macroscopic development of the tribes, but if we start zeroing in on people, the individuals of the tribes, they had their loves and their hates and their rituals and their religions and the games.
You must be interested in games at least to have put so many different variations of games in the books.
That lended character to these people too.
Yes. Well, I have this theory that the Shumai being in love with the open, in a sense, are not necessarily made rendered stupid by that.
As in some cultures, they're really extremely aware of their surroundings and they have a great sense of play.
So it seemed quite natural to me that they would develop these games.
And two of the games, for example, a star game and a game of Nana, are both functional for them too.
The one helping them locate themselves and the other helping them sharpen their reflexes.
So they're both games and they're educational tools as well.
The other interesting tribe to me was the Emery.
Oh, yeah.
Are they Italians?
Well, there are some Italian in their background.
They're located north of Denver, up toward Boulder.
And they're just the people in that area who survived.
The particular reason for their, the particular function they have in the book is that I was trying to use, among other things, various societies as ways of looking at the question of domination.
I mean, the pale bar are a female dominant society.
The only centonies we see that we never see them at home and they are sort of a military society, but fairly democratic in the organization.
The Shumai are a male dominated society, but kind of mildly so.
And I needed a society in which the domination was very great.
And the Emery served that function in the book.
I discovered in writing the book that I, I did, I was trying to see where the effects of domination in society.
Because every society does dominate in some ways.
Certain groups dominate others.
And I discovered that the more severe the domination was, the more danger that dominators really incurred because they lost a clear grasp of the feelings and aspirations of the people they were dominating.
And the Emery are really a study in that the, the situation has grown so top heavy that it collapses.
And I wanted, just attacked the hero who seems to operate as a catalyst wherever he appears in the book, just to be that the person who gives it that push that makes it topple.
And I think that was very good of him to do.
I tried to indicate that he naturally didn't cure the society of these habits right away, but they are moving in the direction of a more reasonable sense of government.
Was just that modeled after any historical figure?
No, I tried to just make him up.
And I've, I even, I've tried to model characters after people I know, but I've never been able to make it work.
About two pages into the character, they grow so vivid in so much themselves that they cease being anybody I know about.
And just acquire their own personality.
I discovered only last year when someone showed me that in the National Geographic, there is a minor deity in Pakistan named Jastak.
And I thought I'd made the word up.
The ends of the circle, my interpretation of it was that it was whimsical compared to the other two books.
It didn't seem as serious and we learned about all these strange societies and they, they were quite odd.
So it didn't, so it appeared to be whimsical to me is that did you have that in mind or is that just my interpretation?
Well, I think it was somewhat more whimsical.
The problem I set for myself there was I asked what are the skills that a young married couple has to know in order to be successfully married.
And the book starts with a marriage that just fallen apart almost immediately.
And in essence, they learn the skills.
And as because of the peculiarities of Elbar society, Auro has much more self-knowledge than does El.
What she lacks is the knowledge of the aspects and virtues of manhood as well as some of the disagreeable sides of males.
And everything that happens to her in the book instructs her further about the nature and the validity of men.
But Stel doesn't have a very clear sense of himself.
And so his experience in my mind is a sort of an odyssey.
That is, it's a psychological journey and the things he meets are the things I think he has to learn about himself.
The artist of all of society is the Roti, which is, I'm not even sure it works.
But the curious thing is that most people who read the book simply take it as a book of a series of adventures.
And it works for them.
And maybe I oughtn't to confess it, but, you know, if you add an E in front of Roti and a C at the end, you end up with the word erotic.
And in essence, this is the problem.
The psychological problem that Stel is brought to confront when he runs into them.
He's now lived through the winter and he's growing more comfortable in his aloneness.
And the problem of eroticism arises in his experience.
He tries to flee from it.
Somehow it keeps following him.
And in order to escape it, he decides to be beyond it, as I've seen some people do.
And in a sense, this is his entering into the Ozar society, which is a society of old people.
And the problems he encounters there are essentially problems that one encounters with age.
Decrepitude, jealousy, inability to function, and impending death.
And in essence, he discovers that he can't really survive in that society or function in it.
In essence, it costs him up.
And as soon as he leaves, along comes the Roti again.
And so he tries a new approach to ridding himself of that problem by just simply killing them.
But in killing eroticism, he also kills feelings, essentially.
So he enters into a feelingless period, a period of intense self-examination.
And in the mountains, he meets in the character named Skula.
He meets what he might become if he continues those tendencies and gets to have what I think of as a conversation with himself.
And he does a lot of suffering, but out of this, he emerges with a kind of self-mastering and everything after that that he meets.
He meets as someone more or less in control of himself, which is really what he has had to learn, as I can see him of it anyway.
This is something on the spur of the moment as an English student in college years ago.
I was always curious about, okay, you just explained what Stell was going through through these various devices.
Did you sit down before you wrote the book and said, aha, I'm going to have him develop in this manner?
Or is this kind of a post-mortem analysis of what you did?
Did you sit out to write this and this was the symbolism?
Yeah, when I wrote the Breaking of North Wall, so many people expressed amazement that I didn't sit down and plot it.
And I just sort of wrote it.
Somehow I felt, well, gee, they know more about this than I do, because most of them were writers.
I better plot the next book.
And so I spent quite a bit of time planning it all out and analyzing the problems that were to be encountered in the book.
So it's a very different kind of book.
It's much more of a planned book.
I think I tried to consciously direct it at a fairly juvenile audience, too.
And the themes are all fairly well spelled out, fairly explicitly in the book.
I have had hopes that it would begin to be read in advanced high school or early college classes.
And I know I tried it out on a group of freshmen I taught, which was a rather odd experience.
But at any rate, they seemed to understand it and they wrote a paper on it and the thematic statements were in there.
So it's much more of a literary production than North Wall.
In the Dome in the Forest, you've been introduced as to another set of people, the people that have been in the Dome for centuries.
And you went to great lengths to portray the advanced knowledge that they might bring as a two-edged sword.
Is this come from your own private feelings?
Yes, it does.
And also, one of the main things I was trying to do in the book was to examine the difference between intuition and logic as a means of human understanding.
And there are certain characters in the book, like Stale and Auro, and like Ruth Ann, who comes from the Dome and almost immediately marries a character named Blue.
They are people who combine to a certain degree feeling and thought or intuition and logic.
And they very quietly succeed in advancing their societies, but they're also extremeed as represented by Tor the Shumai as a man of incredible intuition and yielded from the Dome as a person of nearly pure logic.
And those two really ought to get together, but they sort of instinctively also distrust each other.
And in the end, well, in the book, Pelbargon goes through a severe internal struggle as to whether to accept the Dome people into their society.
And in essence, the struggle to me is whether or not the society is going to turn from being essentially a religious society to being much more of a technological society.
And they decide in favor of technology, but it's not entirely a victory, as I see it.
Just as it is in our world, I think what we see going on in the Falkland Islands now is a good example of the degree to which technology has outrun the ability to relate to one another as human beings.
And as the book continues, we see the logical people, the merely logical people continually making gross mistakes.
And the intuitional people, but particularly Tor, finding less and less of a place in the Central Society of the Heart River, that is, Pelbar.
And in the end, Tor and his nephew are sort of coughed up. They leave. They go essentially exploring, which is what intuition tends to do.
And Eelen remains, but not entirely happily. You know, in essence, I don't think that either Tor or Eelen will ever be happy because they're too intense and they're too one-sided.
But I tried to portray the assets you get with each of these kinds of thoughts and also the liabilities.
The merely logical people do not perceive Pel's humanhood when he penetrates the dome and they're quite willing to contemplate intersecting him in order to see how he works because they don't have feelings.
And I think, I don't know, ultimately, without intuition and feeling, without that outreach of sympathy, we get ourselves in terrible trouble.
And yet we need logic. So that's essentially what I had in mind.
Towards the end of that book, you describe the situation that led to the Great Fire and by some chance it resembles slightly the situation that our world is in now. What do you think the chances of something like that actually occurring are?
Well, I am one of those people who are worried about it.
The thing is we keep building more and more sophisticated devices for destroying ourselves.
And the thing is too that even if Russia and the United States keep under control because we are relatively sophisticated in our perception of what might happen, right now, of course, Britain and France and Red China, India, almost certainly Israel, almost certainly South Africa, have the bomb.
I see that I leave anybody else.
I think that's it.
And it looks as though Pakistan will have it soon. If the Israelis don't keep bombing Iraq, they're going to have it.
I understand that Argentinians are manufacturing fishnable material.
And there are much more volatile nations which are likely to have the bomb pretty soon.
And I think that poses an immense threat to humanity because particularly of all of the interlacing treaties and alliances that everybody seems to have that tell very easily if, well, if Israel were threatened by atomic weapons, it would almost certainly defend itself.
It would be very difficult for the US and Russia to stay out of that.
I feel that disarmament is one of the most important questions we have facing us today.
What's it going to take to affect something like that?
Well, I don't know. I hope it doesn't take another disaster, another dropping of the bomb anywhere.
Certainly it's going to have to take a revision of the basic attitudes of the politicians of the major powers.
I don't believe they're asking the right questions because they seem to be asking, you know, how can we prevail? How can we become dominant?
And the question that should be asked is how can we survive?
Well, we are approaching global problems with village mentalities and ultimately this is one of the very great uses of science fiction.
I think it expands the thought to see the real implications of problems that we get ourselves into.
I guess in your books, since the people on a more primitive level, they can make mistakes and it's not quite, they're a little more forgiving than if we make mistakes now with the technology that we have.
Yeah. I suppose it must have been a disaster for, say, a small village on the coast of Britain in early medieval times to have a whole gang of Viking ships
sail up and burn the place to the ground. But even as disastrous as that was, it was only local.
And the problem now is that our disasters tend to be awfully widespread. You just can't run away.
We'll leave the morbid subjects for now. You talked earlier about all this information where the various tribes got started.
So surely these three books aren't going to be the only ones that we will see in this milieu?
No. The fourth book, which is called The Fall of the Shell, will be out in October. I'm working on a fifth right now, which is tentatively titled An Ambush of Shadows.
And I have projected two more. I don't have it very elaborately plotted, but more or less. And I'm quite sure there will be more beyond that. But these are, this is as far as I see it very clearly.
Will these be paperback or hardback releases?
They'll be paperback as the first three.
One thing the three books so far have had different cover art. It's not immediately apparent that they're a series.
I was particularly struck by the cover, the Barbieri cover on the Dome of the Forest. I didn't know what it was until I read the passage towards the end.
And obviously the artist had read the book or had read that section anyway, which is very rare. Were you pleased in general with the covers and what's your comments on that one in particular?
Well, Daryl Sleet, who did the cover of The Breaking of North Wall, is also doing the cover of The Fall of the Shell.
And when I first saw the cover of North Wall, I was really kind of shocked because it didn't look literally like my theory of what North Wall looked like.
And the more I looked at it, the more pleased I became because it seems to me to be metaphorically a very good North Wall, a kind of soaring, defiant edifice.
The end of the circle cover kind of disappointed me a little. I guess it's the section of the book which is set around the Ozare.
And I think that it has proven the least successful of the three covers because as I found out, the cover sells the book many times.
But I don't know. I like it because it metaphorically it does suggest the long trek to the west and the presence of the nuclear echoes from the past.
The dome in the forest cover, though, did not really come about as you anticipated. It's kind of an odd story because when I was halfway through the book and I talked to my editor about what it was going to be of light,
he told me, we have this cover sitting around here and we don't know what we're going to use it for. Would you mind if I send it to you to see if you like it for your book?
And so he did. And I liked the cover very much. And so I actually wrote the cover into that scene near the end of the book.
And I think that it fits the theme of the book very nicely. I'm really more and more pleased with it all the time because it's not a dome. It's not a dome blowing up or anything.
It is, in essence, a kind of monument to the old Shumai spirit of, well, which recalls to me what Henry Thoreau says in his book, The Main Wood, that the truest user of the forest is the poet because he takes the best of the forest and leaves it as it was.
And what Thore tries to tell Sark about his son is that, yes, he has died, but he has also affirmed the human spirit, which he has by getting his life for the preservation of others and the preservation of a way of life which he and they have thought of as being very fruitful.
And one that kind of merges with things that uses the environment without destroying it or violating it. And the scene is right near a kind of microcosmic time of fire.
That is, the modern weapons get inserted into, it's almost like anachronism, even though it is in the future, they get inserted into a primitive society and before long they get away again and destroy an entire valley, a beautiful valley.
And the situation is corrected by those who have a much greater respect for the environment, one of which dies in the process. And that's part of what the book affirms.
You see, in a sense I'm trying through the series to indicate, I hope realistically, but to indicate anyway that if social growth happens in conjunction with technological growth, we're going to do a whole lot better than if we simply give ourselves to technology and remain social dwarfs.
I think this is one of the great dangers of our society today.
At this point, I have three more questions on my list and we need to change our tape, just change the size. So if you'll bear with us a couple of minutes, we'll change it. Would you, if you'd like to take a break or anything, this would be a good time.